Throughout history, milk has commonly been regarded as a vital part of a balanced diet. Popular sayings and slogans such as "Milk: it does a body good" and "Got Milk?" have brought milk into the mainstream media and further propelled the notion of it being a main staple of proper nutrition.

Milk is frequently found at the top of many household grocery lists in the US and parts of Europe, but is rarely consumed in Asian and African countries.

Milk can come from many different species. Cows, sheep and goat milk are the most popularly consumed. There are also many "milk alternatives" available such as soymilk, almond milk, coconut milk and hemp milk.

This article will focus on cow's milk. Even cow's milk comes in many varieties including flavored, lactose-free, milk with added omega-3s, hormone free, organic and reduced fat milk.

Whether milk is actually a healthy choice depends on the individual and type of milk being consumed. Some milk is high in protein, low in added sugar and free of unnecessary additives, but there are also flavored milks that have just as much sugar as a can of soda.

For someone with a milk allergy, any kind of milk would be off limits. Lactose intolerant individuals may be able to tolerate lactose-free milks depending on their level of intolerance. Vegans avoiding animal products would not consume true milk at all and would likely opt for a milk alternative such as soy or almond milk.

Contents of this article:

Nutritional breakdown of milk
The case for milk
The case against milk
Precautions
Your best bet
Nutritional breakdown of milk
One cup of milk is considered one serving. The nutritional breakdown of milk depends on the fat content. Whole milk with 3.25% fat contains 146 calories, 8 grams of fat, 13 grams of carbohydrate and 8 grams of protein in one cup. One cup of nonfat or skim milk has about 86 calories, 0 grams of fat, 12 grams of carbohydrate and 8 grams of protein.

cow and a jug of milk
Milk can come from many different species such as cows, sheep and goats - milk from these animals are the most popularly consumed.
Some important nutrients that milk provides are:

Calcium
Calcium has many functions in the body, but its primary job is the development and maintenance of healthy bones and teeth. Calcium is also important for blood clotting and wound healing, maintaining normal blood pressure and muscle contractions including heartbeat.

It is important to try to pair calcium-rich foods with a source of vitamin D to improve absorption.

The National Institute of Health recommends 1,000 milligrams a day of calcium for individuals over 18 years of age. There are 306 milligrams of calcium in one cup of skim milk.

Choline
Choline is an important nutrient that helps with sleep, muscle movement, learning and memory. Choline helps to maintain the structure of cellular membranes, aids in the transmission of nerve impulses, assists in the absorption of fat and reduces chronic inflammation.4

Potassium
High potassium intakes are associated with a reduced risk of stroke, heart disease, high blood pressure, protection against loss of muscle mass, preservation of bone mineral density and reduction in the formation of kidney stones. A high potassium diet is associated with a 20% decreased risk of dying from all causes.3

The recommended daily intake of potassium for all adults is 4,700 mg per day.

Vitamin D (fortified)
Vitamin D is important for the formation, growth, and repair of bones. Vitamin D also plays a role in calcium absorption and immune function.

Vitamin D deficiency has been associated with osteoporosis, depression, chronic fatigue, muscle pain, PMS, hypertension, and breast and colon cancer.

Milk also provides magnesium, phosphorus, vitamins A, riboflavin, vitamin B-6 and vitamin B-12.

The case for milk
Bone health
Everyone has heard that milk is good for the bones, and that is because milk is one of the primary sources of vitamin D in the American diet, as well as a good source of calcium. However, adequate calcium and vitamin D intake is not enough to prevent osteoporosis.

mother and daughter drinking milk
A study in 40,000 Norwegian women discovered that those who drank milk as children and continued to do so throughout adulthood had a significantly lower chance of developing breast cancer.
Regular physical activity and strength training, along with not smoking and eating a diet low in sodium and high in potassium also contribute to overall bone health and a decreased risk of osteoporosis.

Brain health
Researchers from the University of Kansas found that consuming more dairy is associated with a higher amount of glutathione - a powerful antioxidant - in the brain, among older adults.

Milk drinkers who met the recommended three daily servings of milk and milk products had antioxidant levels that were approximately 30% higher compared to adults who got less than half a serving. While more research needs to be done, this study suggests a new potential benefit of adults getting enough milk in their diets.

Blood pressure and heart health
An increase in potassium intake along with a decrease in sodium intake is the most important dietary change that a person can make to reduce their risk of cardiovascular disease, according to Mark Houston, MD, MS, an associate clinical professor of medicine at Vanderbilt Medical School and director of the Hypertension Institute at St Thomas Hospital in Tennessee.3

In one study, those who consumed 4,069 mg of potassium per day had a 49% lower risk of death from ischemic heart disease compared with those who consumed less potassium (about 1,000 mg per day).3

Unfortunately, according to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, fewer than 2% of US adults meet the daily 4,700 mg recommendation.

Leafy greens like spinach and kale are the best sources of potassium, along with citrus fruits, bananas, tomatoes, prunes and dairy products like milk and yogurt.

Depression
Adequate vitamin D levels support the production of serotonin, a hormone associated with mood, appetite and sleep. Vitamin D deficiency has been associated with depression, chronic fatigue and PMS.

Muscle building and weight loss
Milk is a natural source of high-quality protein. Maintaining a healthy amount of muscle is important for supporting metabolism and contributing to weight loss and weight maintenance.

A diet that is sufficient in protein is needed to preserve or increase lean muscle mass. Dairy proteins support muscle growth and repair. According to Today's Dietitian magazine, a recent analysis of over 20 clinical trials suggested that an increased milk intake can boost muscle mass and strength during resistance exercise in both younger and older adults.6
